Tutorial: How to calculate new vs returning users (#5858)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/tutorials/track-new-returning-users.md

---
title: How to track new and returning users in PostHog
date: 2023-04-26
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
sidebar: Docs
featuredImage: ../images/tutorials/banners/tutorial-18.png
tags: ["trends", "cohorts"]
---

> Understanding user growth is critical to a successful product. A lack of new users or existing users churning is a bad sign. This tutorial goes over the different ways to calculate new and returning users in PostHog, as well as insights you can create using those calculations.

Reviewer: Nit: feel free to ignore
```suggestion
Understanding user growth is critical to building a successful product. A lack of new users or existing users churning is a bad sign. This tutorial goes over the different ways to calculate new and returning users in PostHog, as well as insights you can create using these calculations.
```

> **How does Google Analytics calculate new vs returning users?** When you first visit a site, Google Analytics generates a client ID for your device and sets it in your cookies. GA uses this client ID cookie to calculate if a user is new (didn’t have cookie set) or returning (had cookie set). This, like any tracking, isn’t 100% accurate.

## Calculating new users

There are multiple ways to calculate new users in PostHog depending on your situation and need.

### Completed event for the first time cohort

The first and easiest is creating a cohort where the users completed an event (such as pageviews, [identify](/docs/getting-started/identify-users), or a custom event) for the first time. To set this up, go to the cohort tab, click new cohort, enter a title and description, then choose "completed an event for the first time" with your event and recency. 

![New users](../images/tutorials/track-new-returning-users/new.png)

You can then use this cohort of new users for further analysis.

> **Note:** since this is a behavioral cohort (based on events), this cohort won’t work with feature flags.

### First time event tracker

> You can set up and use the [first time event tracker app](/docs/apps/first-time-event-tracker) to add property to events that says if it was the first time it happened.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can set up and use the [first time event tracker app](/docs/apps/first-time-event-tracker) to add a property to events that indicates if it was the first time it happened.
```

To set it up, search for "First Time Event Tracker" in your PostHog instance, set the event you want to track in the configuration (like `$pageview`) and enable the app. 

![First time event tracker](../images/tutorials/track-new-returning-users/first.png)

You can then filter for events where `is_first_event_user` is `true` recently to get new users for analysis. This method is useful if you don't want to set up or use cohorts in your analysis. 

### Manually set user property

If neither of these works for you, you can set up a user property manually in a custom event. 

For example, when a user first uses your API, set their creation date in their user properties. To do this, you can capture an event at the same time, and use the `$set_once` property like this:

```python
posthog.capture(
    '<ph_project_api_key>',
    event='new user created',
    properties={ '$set_once': { 'created_at': '2023-04-24T22:02:02' } }
)
```

This is especially useful for projects that are on the backend, not using autocapture, or not using `posthog-js`, or have many custom events. 

## Calculating returning users

> Calculating returning users is done by identifying users who aren’t new and completed an event recently. To create a cohort for this, you can use the new user cohort as an anti-cohort (choose "Not in cohort"), and include another criteria for completing an event recently.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
Calculating returning users is done by identifying users who aren’t new and have completed an event recently. To create a cohort for this, you can use the new user cohort as an anti-cohort (choose "Not in cohort"), and include another criteria for completing an event recently.
```
